chore: Clarify bytes metrics in component spec (#12912)
vectordotdev/vector: docs/specs/component.md

### Source and sink naming

- MUST only contain ASCII alphanumeric, lowercase, and underscores.
- MUST be a noun named after the protocol or service that the component
  integrates with.
- MAY be suffixed with the event type, `logs`, `metrics`, or `traces`

>   (e.g., `kubernetes_logs`, `apache_metrics`).

Author: I think it's clear. This is an option if the source/sink is specific to the type.

  individual events. For example, emitting the `EventsReceived` event for 10
  events MUST increment the `component_received_events_total` counter by 10.

#### ComponentBilled

*Sources* MUST emit a `ComponentBilled` event that repsents the billing of
enterprise customers.

- Emission
  - MUST emit only if the `enterprise.enabled` config option is set to `true`.
  - MUST emit immediatley before the creation of Vector events and after
    decompression and filtering of raw bytes.
- Properties
  - `byte_size` - REQUIRED, number of raw bytes received that will be turned
    into Vector events.
- Metrics
  - MUST increment the `component_billed_bytes_total` counter by the defined
    value with the defined properties as metric tags.
- Logs
  - MUST log a `Bytes billed.` message at the `trace` level with the defined
    properties as key-value pairs.
  - MUST NOT be rate limited.

#### ComponentBytesReceived

*Sources* MUST emit a `ComponentBytesReceived` event that represents the
reception of *raw event bytes*. It MUST emit immediately after receiving
bytes from the upstream source and before decompression, filtering, and the

> creation of Vector events.

Reviewer: To clarify, you mean for this metric to indicate the total number of bytes received on, for example, a TCP socket? This would include HTTP headers, gRPC envelopes, etc.

Author: No, _not_ the envelope/framing, just the raw bytes used to create events. For HTTP, this would be the HTTP body only (AKA the value of `Content-Length`). For a socket, this would be the bytes received minus the framing/delimiter.

Author: I clarify this in the requirements below.

      as typically represented by the `Content-Length` header.
    - For UDP, TCP, and Unix protocols, the total number of raw bytes received
      from the socket excluding the delimiter.
    - For files, the total number of raw bytes read from the file excluding the
      delimiter.
  - `protocol` - REQUIRED, the protocol used to send the bytes. MUST be one of
    `tcp`, `udp`, `unix`, `http`, `https`, `file`, etc.)
  - `http_path` - OPTIONAL, the HTTP path, excluding query strings.
  - `socket` - OPTIONAL, the socket number that bytes were received from.
- Metrics
  - MUST increment the `component_received_bytes_total` counter by the defined
    value with the defined properties as metric tags.
- Logs
  - MUST log a `Bytes received.` message at the `trace` level with the defined
    properties as key-value pairs.
  - MUST NOT be rate limited.

#### ComponentBytesSent

*Sinks* MUST emit a `ComponentBytesSent` that represents the number of raw
bytes sent downstream.

- Emission
  - MUST emit immediately after *successful* transmission the bytes.
  - MUST emit before compression.
  - MUST NOT emit for pull-based sinks since they do not send data. For

>     example, the `prometheus_exporter` sink MUST NOT emit this event.

Reviewer: Based on the naming, as a user, I'd expect this to be the inverse of `ComponentBytesReceived`. That is: it would indicate the raw bytes sent by the component over, for example, a TCP socket. This would mean both successful and unsuccessful requests. It would also mean pull based sinks would emit this metric.

Author: This does not include unsuccessful requests, it represents the successful delivery of bytes. This is an internal component metric, not a host-level network metric.

- Emission
  - MUST emit immediately after creating or receiving Vector events.
- Properties
  - `count` - The count of Vector events.
  - `byte_size` - The estimated JSON byte size of all events received.
- Metrics
  - MUST increment the `component_received_events_total` counter by the defined
    `quantity` property with the other properties as metric tags.
  - MUST increment the `component_received_event_bytes_total` counter by the
    defined `byte_size` property with the other properties as metric tags.
- Logs
  - MUST log a `Events received.` message at the `trace` level with the
    defined properties as key-value pairs.
  - MUST NOT be rate limited.

#### ComponentEventsSent

*All components* MUST emit an `ComponentEventsSent` event that represents the
emission of Vector events to the next downstream component(s).

- Emission
  - MUST emit immediately after *successful* transmission of Vector events.
    MUST NOT emit if the transmission was unsuccessful.
  - MUST NOT emit for pull-based sinks since they do not send events. For
    example, the `prometheus_exporter` sink MUST NOT emit this event.
- Properties
  - `count` - REQUIRED, the number of Vector events.

>   - `byte_size` - REQUIRED, the estimated JSON byte size of all events sent.

Author: Be more explicit this this is estimated and JSON

>   - `count` - REQUIRED, the number of Vector events.
>   - `byte_size` - REQUIRED, the estimated JSON byte size of all events sent.

Reviewer 2: Just making it match the wording/syntax of the `ComponentEventsReceived` event.

```suggestion
  - `count` - The count of Vector events.
  - `byte_size` - The estimated JSON byte size of all events sent.
```

  - `output` - OPTIONAL, for components that can use multiple outputs, the name
    of the output that events were sent to. For events sent to the default
    output, this value MUST be `_default`.
- Metrics

>   - MUST increment the `component_sent_events_total` counter by the defined
>     value with the defined properties as metric tags.
>   - MUST increment the `component_sent_event_bytes_total` counter by the event's
>     byte size in JSON representation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - MUST increment the `component_sent_events_total` counter by the defined
    `quantity` property with the other properties as metric tags.
  - MUST increment the `component_sent_event_bytes_total` counter by the
    defined `byte_size` property with the other properties as metric tags.
```

Just making this match up with the received event language.

#### ComponentBytesReceived

*Sources* MUST emit a `ComponentBytesReceived` event that represents the
reception of *raw network bytes*. This event is intended to reflect the raw
network usage for the source.

- Emission
  - MUST emit immediately after reception of raw network bytes.
  - MUST emit *before* mutation of the bytes, such as decryption, decompression,
    and filtering.
- Properties
  - `byte_size` - REQUIRED, number of raw bytes received.
    - SHOULD be the total number of raw network bytes received *including*
      framing (headers, delimiters, etc.). If If this is not possible due to a
      client limitation, then the framed bytes MUST be used and the `framed` tag

>       MUST be set to `true`. 

Reviewer 2: So I find this wording a little confusing.

Based on the definition below of `framed`, I would expect `byte_size` to include the size of the entire request -- framing, headers, payload, all of it -- when `framed` is `true`... but here, you're saying that it's not possible to include the bytes related to framing/headers, then the "framed bytes" (huh? does this mean payload only?) must be used and `framed` must be set to `true`.

Overall, I think there needs to be a change to the wording to talk about the bytes as raw vs processed, _then_ refer to "framing" as all the additional bytes on top of the bytes we have to process aka decode, and then clear up the weird conditional statement about what `framed` means.

Author: I agree. See https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/pull/12912#issuecomment-1206572535 for more info.

  - `framed` - REQUIRED, `true` if the `byte_size` represents framed bytes,

>     `false` if not. See `bytes_size` for framing details.

Reviewer 2: `bytes_size` -> `byte_size`

  - `url` - REQUIRED, the URL of the upstream source.
    - For HTTP, MUST not include the query string, only the host and path.
      (i.e., `http://<host>:<port>/<path>`)
    - For sockets, the full socket URL (i.e., `tcp://<address>:<port>`)
    - For files, MUST be the full file url (i.e., `file://<path>`)
- Metrics
  - MUST increment the `component_received_bytes_total` counter by the defined
    value with the defined properties as metric tags.
- Logs
  - MUST log a `Bytes received.` message at the `trace` level with the defined
    properties as key-value pairs.
  - MUST NOT be rate limited.

#### ComponentBytesSent

*Sinks* MUST emit a `ComponentBytesSent` that represents the emission of
*raw network bytes*. This event is intended to reflect the raw network usage
for the sink.

- Emission
  - MUST emit immediately after transmission of raw network bytes regardless
    if the transmission was successful or not.

>   - MUST emit *after* mutation of the bytes, such as decryption, decompression,

Reviewer 2: `decryption` -> `encryption`, `decompression` -> `compression`

    and filtering.
  - MUST NOT emit for pull-based sinks since they do not send data. For
    example, the `prometheus_exporter` sink MUST NOT emit this event.
- Properties
  - `byte_size` - REQUIRED, number of raw bytes sent.
    - SHOULD be the total number of raw network bytes sent *including*
      framing (headers, delimiters, etc.). If If this is not possible due to a
      client limitation, then the framed bytes MUST be used and the `framed` tag
      MUST be set to `true`. 

>   - `framed` - REQUIRED, `true` if the `byte_size` represents framed bytes,

Reviewer 2: Same comments as the ones I left on `ComponentsBytesReceived`.

*All components* that can drop events MUST emit a `ComponentEventsDropped`
event in accordance with the [EventsDropped event] requirements.

#### SinkNetworkBytesSent

*Sinks* MUST emit a `SinkNetworkBytesSent` that represents the egress of
*raw network bytes*.

- Emission

>   - MUST emit immediately after egress of raw network bytes regardless
>     if the transmission was successful or not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - MUST emit immediately after egress of raw network bytes regardless
    of whether the transmission was successful or not.
```

    - This includes pull-based sinks, such as the `prometheus_exporter` sink,
      and SHOULD reflect the bytes sent to the client when requested (pulled).
  - MUST emit *after* processing of the bytes (encryption, compression,
    filtering, etc.)
- Properties

>   - `byte_size` - REQUIRED, number of raw network bytes sent after processing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `byte_size` - The number of raw network bytes sent after processing.
```

    - SHOULD be the closest representation possible of raw network bytes based
      on the sink's capabilities. For example, if the sink uses a HTTP
      client that does not provide access to the total request byte size, then
      the sink should use the byte size of the payload/body.
- Metrics
  - MUST increment the `component_sent_network_bytes_total` counter by the
    defined value with the defined properties as metric tags.
- Logs
  - MUST log a `Network bytes sent.` message at the `trace` level with the
    defined properties as key-value pairs.
  - MUST NOT be rate limited.

#### SourceNetworkBytesReceived

*Sources* MUST emit a `SourceNetworkBytesReceived` event that represents the
ingress of *raw network bytes*.

- Emission
  - MUST emit immediately after ingress of raw network bytes.
  - MUST emit *before* processing of the bytes (decryption, decompression,
    filtering, etc.).
    - This includes pull-based sources that issue requests to ingest bytes.
- Properties

>   - `byte_size` - REQUIRED, number of raw network bytes received before

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `byte_size` - The number of raw network bytes received before
```

*All components* that can drop events MUST emit a `ComponentEventsDropped`
event in accordance with the [EventsDropped event] requirements.

> #### SinkNetworkBytesSent

Author: Cover billing with a post-processing size

*Sinks* MUST emit a `SinkNetworkBytesSent` that represents the egress of
*raw network bytes*.

- Emission
  - MUST emit immediately after egress of raw network bytes regardless
    if the transmission was successful or not.
  - MUST emit *after* processing of the bytes (encryption, compression,
    filtering, etc.)
  - MUST NOT emit for pull-based sinks since they do not send data. For

>     example, the `prometheus_exporter` sink MUST NOT emit this event.

Reviewer: Given the change here to be oriented on network bytes, do we still want to skip pull-based sinks?

Author: Nope, good call, updated.

- Properties
  - `byte_size` - REQUIRED, number of raw network bytes sent after processing.

>     - SHUOLD be the closest representation possible of raw network bytes based

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - SHOULD be the closest representation possible of raw network bytes based
```

      on the sink's capabilities. For example, if the sink uses a HTTP
      client that does not provide access to the total request byte size, then
      the sink should use the byte size of the payload/body.
  - `url` - REQUIRED, the URL of the downstream destination.
    - For HTTP, MUST not include the query string, only the host and path.

>       (i.e., `http(s)://<host>:<port>/<path>`)

Reviewer: This turns out to not be a great idea for sinks like the AWS S3 sink where the object key is part of the URL.

My suggestion would be that we drop `url` entirely until someone asks for it. I think the only sink where it'd be useful to users is the `http` sink, but even then I'm not sure.

    - For sockets, the full socket URL (i.e., `tcp://<address>:<port>`)

>     - For files, MUST be the full file url (i.e., `file://<path>`)

Reviewer: Also here, I suggest we drop these until someone asks for it. I can suggest these changes in a follow-up PR if we prefer, since they are moved. I just figured since this is a new event it is a good time to make these additional broad changes.

- Metrics
  - MUST increment the `component_sent_network_bytes_total` counter by the
    defined value with the defined properties as metric tags.
- Logs
  - MUST log a `Network bytes sent.` message at the `trace` level with the
    defined properties as key-value pairs.
  - MUST NOT be rate limited.

#### SourceNetworkBytesReceived

*Sources* MUST emit a `SourceNetworkBytesReceived` event that represents the
ingress of *raw network bytes*.

- Emission
  - MUST emit immediately after ingress of raw network bytes.
  - MUST emit *before* processing of the bytes (decryption, decompression,
    filtering, etc.).
- Properties
  - `byte_size` - REQUIRED, number of raw network bytes received before
    processing (decryption, decompression, filtering, etc.).

>     - SHUOLD be the closest representation possible of raw network bytes based

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - SHOULD be the closest representation possible of raw network bytes based
```

      on the source's capabilities. For example, if the source uses a HTTP
      client that only provides access to the request body, then the raw
      request body bytes should be used.
  - `url` - REQUIRED, the URL of the upstream source.
    - For HTTP, MUST not include the query string, only the host and path.
      (i.e., `http://<host>:<port>/<path>`)
    - For sockets, the full socket URL (i.e., `tcp://<address>:<port>`)

>     - For files, MUST be the full file url (i.e., `file://<path>`)

Reviewer: Same here, I suggest we drop these tags and simplify. I think we went a little overboard on the initial metric definition.
